You know, for a lot of our investors,
I think they had largely written the
company off and we're like, "Yeah, the
company's just dead. It's not going to
go anywhere." I mean, it just felt like
chewing glass. It's incredibly
difficult. You're totally emotionally
raw. You have no idea if you know you're
going to make it to the next week, let
alone the next month. I think there were
also a lot of questions like, "What do
you know about healthcare?" Like, "What
do you know about aviation or
aerospace?" Like, you know, you have no
expertise. Like, why would why would you
be able to succeed at this? That was
probably the worst and most difficult
time I've ever had to go through like in
my life. I mean, it's just so scary. You
know, there's like all these team
members who are relying on you. You
know, we we had to get lucky. And it
also helped that
we were just totally stubborn and
hard-headed. We're like, we're doing
this. No one's going to get in our way.
I'm Keller Clifton. I'm the CEO and
co-founder of Zipline.
I I I I didn't even really know that
entrepreneurship was a thing you could
do graduating from college but I read
delivering happiness which was this book
by Tony Sheay and uh I was kind of blown
away because Tony and his partner Alfred
Len had built these amazing businesses
coming out of college and they'd
actually both uh lived in the same dorm
that I lived in in college. I sent an
email to Tony. He actually gave us an
apartment in this apartment building
where he had rented all these apartments
in Las Vegas. We started building these
cell phone robots that we were selling
on Kickstarter at the time out of that
apartment. We just started mailing
robots to people that you could plug
your iPhone into that would you become
this little robot that run around inside
your house. The company was called
Remotive. Uh and Tony introduced ended
up introducing me to Alfred about 6
months later. Alfred came out and hung
out in the apartment with us for uh a
couple days and Sequoia became our first
institutional investor. I think
ultimately when we started shipping that
first product for emotive it started it
started to become pretty clear to us
that you know consumer robotics was not
the right place to start. We it was you
know the more we thought about it the
more we learned we started to understand
that you you really want repetitive use
cases and you want controlled
environments. This was the reason that
robots had already at that time scaled
um pretty dramatically in warehouses
in some hospitals. And I remember going
and seeing there's actually this company
KA Robotics which actually Alfred was
one of the first people to work with
when they were at Zapos. And I got to go
to one of the KA warehouses and see
these orange robots running around
inside on the floor inside this
warehouse moving things back and forth.
They would go and pick up a shelf and
bring it to a human packer. And I
remember seeing that thinking, man,
somebody's going to do that for outside
the warehouse and that's going to be one
of the biggest companies in the world.
>> My wife as an epidemiologist and kept
telling about these projects in public
health, they get stuck on logistics,
things like vaccine campaigns where they
have the vaccines, they have the
doctors, and they just the logistics of
actually getting the vaccines where they
need to be when they're needed just gets
uh kills the whole project. Uh and
that's uh one of the things that
inspired us to go dig into that and
really see what that was. Solving uh
medical supply spy logistics with
drones.
>> The more we learned about global
logistics, the more we understood that,
you know, this is a market that really
only serves the golden billion humans on
Earth. Well, if you're the 7 billion
people who aren't in the golden billion,
your access either sucks or is
non-existent. As a result of that,
millions of people, mainly children, die
every year due to lack of access to
basic medical products. The more we
understood about that, we thought, man,
somebody's going to build an automated
logistic system for Earth. And that
would be something we would be very
proud to spend a decade of our lives
working on. Personally, as a as a very
huge tech skeptic, I was like, "All
right, we're going to go spend time in
the field and understand a million
reasons why we could never make a dent
in this problem." And uh the deeper we
got, the more convinced we were that we
actually could solve this problem and
that we should go for it.
>> I think it's worth pointing out that all
of our investors thought focusing on
logistics was an extremely stupid thing
to do. And I think there were also a lot
of questions like, "What do you know
about healthcare?" like what do you know
about aviation or aerospace? Like you
know you have no expertise like why
would why would you be able to succeed
at this?
>> Quite literally everything was at stake
during this transition. I mean we you
know fully shut down the toy company set
up an auto reply saying click this link
and we'll give you a full refund. So we
kind of like you know fully closed that
door before knowing which door we were
going to open next. We started going to
places where we felt uh a new
transformational kind of logistics
system would just be like undeniably
valuable. We wanted to go and and you
know healthcare was an obvious place to
start cuz we thought it's life- saving,
high willingness to pay. It doesn't have
to be perfect on day one if you're
adding a lot of value to customers
lives. And and then we also needed a
public health care system. We wanted we
didn't want to have to go, you know,
hospital by hospital with private
hospitals trying to convince them to use
the system. We wanted to find, hey,
what's a country where we could go
partner with the public health care
system uh and and deliver things
autonomously. And so we were looking in
uh Central America. We were looking in
Africa, starting to talk to governments.
It ended up being Rwanda, this first
country that really took a bet on us
saying, "Yeah, you should build that
here and we would use it and we would
pay for it."
>> The nature of Rwanda's like topography
is that it's super hilly. So if you like
look on in a sky map, it's like 40 miles
away. It could be anywhere from 3 to 6
hour drive depending on the weather
condition. The conventional logistics
system
um is insufficient in solving um the
problem. The other thing was there's no
standard operating procedures for how
you like pack and fly and receipt blood
that was just delivered from the sky. I
think I think probably the biggest thing
that we realized maybe the biggest
crucible moment for us was like
understanding that the vehicle is only
15% of the complexity of the problem.
You know, we we had we had thought, oh,
we're going to design this really cool
robot. We're going to design this really
cool autonomous aircraft. It's going to
deliver things autonomously. But it
turns out that in a in a in a national
scale logistics system, there are a lot
of different kinds of software and
systems that all have to be interacting
in concert to actually have an instant
delivery service that people can rely on
with their lives.
>> We didn't really know anything about
before we had a package. We thought that
we could order, you know, the hospitals
can place order via a nice iPad
interface. I visited some of the health
facilities. They barely had cell
coverage in most parts of the hospital.
And by the way, they're always like on
the move. So it's not like, you know,
it's it's it's a luxury to be like, I'm
gonna run back to this place where, you
know, there's a computer or whatever for
me to place an order. And so we designed
a ordering system that was just phone
based and WhatsApp based.
>> We didn't know this until we launched,
but Rwanda has some of the most volatile
weather of any country on Earth. And so
we were operating in lightning storms,
rainstorms, insane dust storms. we knew
we we'd be flying very low over
mountains. So before we went to Rwanda,
we engaged with our friends at NASA, the
world experts in this lowaltitude uh
modeling of the airspace. And they sort
of, you know, were scratching their
heads for a minute and they like, you
know, now that we think about it, uh
we've never actually had the data from
flying low over mountains and storms
because no one does that. The moment the
vision for zipline really clicked for me
was when we got past the idea of a
quadcopter
and really started to think deeply about
an airplane. At first it seemed totally
preposterous like wait how how are you
going to make an airplane work for this?
And I think it was only a few days of
thought experiment and whiteboarding out
that we started to realize, oh, hey, the
number one thing we were hearing from
our customers is each additional
kilometer that you can get outside of a
region's biggest city is that much more
value. We started talking to some
experts and realized a pretty small
little airplane could fly pretty fast
extremely efficiently and range
estimates for that, you know, 10x, 20x,
30x,
what a quadcopter could do. I think back
to when we were getting very close to
shipping and at that point, we knew it
was Rwanda. We knew exactly what the use
case was. It was blood delivery. We knew
that most of those blood deliveries were
going to go to bleeding out in
childbirth and the Ministry of Health
started sending us photos uh of mothers
who had passed away. That was one of
those moments that was incredibly
intense um but also incredibly
clarifying when you have that in front
of you. you know, all you know, kind of
academic debates about technology
decisions go out the window because you
had, you know, exactly what your
customer needs and why they needed it
and when they needed it. And not only
was that super motivating, but focusing.
So, we we knew we knew we were only
doing what we absolutely had to do to
get that first version out the door.
>> I remember the first time the Rwanda
Civil Aviation Authority came to visit
our distribution center because we have
to get approval to fly beyond visual
line of sight. Otherwise, how do you
deliver to the hospitals? because we
never had regulatory to fly beyond
visual line of sight. It meant that
we've done the length of the flight by
kind of like circling around the dis our
test sites and whatnot, but we've never
actually had a zip,
you know, disappear
into the horizon. You know, we had to
like walk them through all of our
procedures, do all the pre-flight checks
and and and everything. And then the
moment the zip launched and then it, you
know, 10 seconds later it disappeared
into the horizon
um I think the whole company stopped
breathing.
You just never seen it before. It was
the very first time we were seeing it.
And you know, we were also kind of
looking at the iPad. you know, you're
like looking down to on the iPad to make
sure everything's okay because it's
still monitoring the zip saying, you
know, sending data packets back to be
like, you know, it's about to deliver.
It's coming back. And we just kept
looking down and up, down and up, like,
is it coming back yet? Is it back yet?
And then finally when it like came back
like I think it was like the it felt
like the longest like 5 minutes of our
lives. We ran back inside the tent make
sure they couldn't see us and then we
started just screaming and jumping up
and down cuz that was the very first
time any of us had ever seen an actual
beyond visual line of sight flight.
>> You know we got the service launched. We
turned on one hospital and then
everything broke again for the next you
know eight eight months as we had to
like fix things and iterate. So you know
the first year of operating commercially
was extraordinarily painful basically
like non-stop
over you know uh allnighters
nothing working constant rocks in the
gears and then once it was working well
for that hospital it was clearly saving
lives then it was like can we expand to
21 different hospitals interestingly
that only took us about 3 months it was
9 months to get the first hospital
working and then 3 months to get to all
the 20 other hospitals that we had
signed up to serve you know today
zipline serves
about 5,000 hospitals and health
facilities globally. We've just crossed
100 million commercial autonomous miles
and it's it's become the largest
commercial autonomous system on Earth.
But I think the other thing that really
helped us is that we had one customer
who believed in us and was willing to
bet on us. And you know the ministry of
health and the minister um she had made
this bet on us and we were pretty
hellbent on showing that the technology
could at least do that one basic thing
which was to deliver blood instantly to
those 21 hospitals. And 7 years after
that conversation I was meeting with
this minister and she told me, "Oh yeah,
Keller, you never knew." But the reason
we said yes was that just that morning I
had gotten there this email had gone
around the Ministry of Health about this
mom who had lost her life because they
it took us like 9 hours to get a blood
transfusion to her and she had passed
away by the time we got it to her. And I
remember thinking like this is so
screwed up. There has to be a better
way. And that afternoon you happen to
walk in.
Most hardware companies die before
shipping anything. But then there's like
another crucible moment which is like
the second product. The initial platform
that Zipline built which we creatively
called platform one that system was
really designed specifically with
healthcare delivery in mind and it was
designed to operate at national scale.
>> Customers had been asking us for years.
Let's not just serve outside these metro
areas. Let's serve inside the metro
area. We're like no we don't do that. We
don't do that. We don't do that. And
once we had told every customer that
over and over and over for a couple
years it's a pretty good sign that you
maybe should think about trying to solve
that problem. overall like logistics
directly to homes. Building instant
delivery and what we thought of as
teleportation directly to homes was
basically almost an infinitely large
market. We then started using that
product in 2020 to deliver to homes and
it it was clear to us that there was
demand for many tens of billions of
deliveries every year for this kind of a
service. And it was also clear that
platform one wasn't going to be able,
you know, the overall architecture of
the system was not designed to serve uh
millions of homes in a suburban or even
an urban uh uh location.
>> So Kenan led its small team to really
derisk it from a technology standpoint
like could we actually tackle some of
these use cases and what would the
design look like? How crazy is it going
to be? You know, when we set out to
first build Platform 2, Kenan was
leading this new products team, and they
came up with this crazy contraption
where the aircraft undocks, flies up
high, flies along, and from altitude on
a string, it lowers down a second robot,
and that second robot is going to be
silent and safe and small, and that is
going to leave the package behind.
Frankly, I thought Kenan would have been
insane. like this sounds really cool,
but there's no way this thing's gonna
work. Kenan convinced us to pull a small
little tiger team onto this project and
work on a mediumfidelity prototype and
we invited everyone from the company to
come out and see this delivery
experience. Kenan basically posed this
challenge to pretty much the company
which is come see what this delivery
experience is like and if you have as
much conviction as we do in this, let's
bet the company on it. And the night
before the bit that we met as a
leadership team, as a board to have that
discussion, Ryan texts me and says, you
know, I'm going to trying to kill
concept tomorrow. And I remember
thinking to myself, I was like, all
right, Ryan hasn't seen this demo yet,
so like, let's see what happens.
[Music]
That might be the last time I I ever
doubted Kenan.
>> By noon that day, Ryan was like, "All
right, how fast can we ship this thing?"
So seeing that early concept of platform
2 totally changed everything for me.
>> Platform 2
really marks the next stage of growth
for the company. While I think back to
2016 and we were gearing up to launch
the 21 hospitals in Rwanda and in some
ways it almost feels familiar cuz we're
trying to launch like this you know
similar number of stores for Walmart at
this very moment. For a decade, it's
been clear that, you know, getting
permission to fly beyond visual line of
sight in the US is really the holy grail
from a regulatory perspective. And
Zipline in 2023 became the first company
in US history to be awarded like full
approval to fly beyond visual sight in
all 50 states in the United States. And
it was a it was a milestone 10 years in
the making because you know we had we
had started building Zipline in 2013
thinking you know that
ultimately like will this ever be
possible? It was not clear you know will
this ever be allowed? It was not clear.
And so yeah 10 years later we were
approved for full scale commercial
operations in the US. You know, the
thing that ultimately does kill most
early stage startups is is like you just
like the team just gives up. And at some
point it becomes screwed up enough, the
situation becomes screwed up enough,
enough people leave, enough investors
just kind of like consider the company
to be dead that the people will
eventually just give up and the company
dies. I think probably Zipline is a good
example of like but what if you actually
just didn't you know like what if even
though it was like super bad and it was
not possible to raise money for the
company and everybody thought it was a
stupid idea most the investors thought
the company was dead you know many many
people had left the company cuz it
didn't seem very promising but what if
you just didn't just kept going and like
kept working all nighters and you know I
think that there were a few of us who
were pretty darn are
uh unwilling to give up.